A skin lesion is basically an abnormal mark on the skin, and its appearance may uniquely differ in size and shape compared to the surrounding area of the normal skin. Skin lesions can come in various appearances and can be associated with various skin cancer conditions such as the following: actinic keratoses (akiec), basal cell carcinoma (bcc), benign keratosis-like lesions (bkl), dermatofibroma (df), melanoma (mel), melanocytic nevi (nv), and vascular lesions (vas). Most dermatologists view these skin lesions under good lighting conditions, which sometimes can result in human error in identifying the exact skin condition from the lesions. Thus our research interest is on the development of the classification of skin lesions using advanced computer  vision models such as GhostNetV2_100, EfficientNetV2_b0_r224, FastVit_t8.apple, ShuffleNet_v2_x1_0, LeViT_conv_128s.fb_dist, MobileVit_xxs, MobileNetV4_conv_small.e2400_r224, ghostnetv3_100 , mobileone_s0.apple_in1k , resnext50_32x4d.a1h_in1k , resnetv2_50.a1h_in1k, and efficientformerv2_s0 . These models are chosen as they can capture the delicacies of dermatological images and address the issues of color, texture, and differences in shapes of skin lesions in an efficient and effective manner for image identification tasks. We used complex data preprocessing techniques to improve the quality of images and further expand the HAM10000 dataset that contains more than 10,000 pictures of various skin lesions in the dermatoscope. Hyperparameter optimisation, more strict training algorithms of the models deliver accuracy. Compared on the basis of testing accuracy, GhostNetV2_100 is the promising model in this area of real-time categorization of skin lesions with the test accuracy rate of 98.60%. We also explainable AI techniques such as GradCAM etc. so that the model internal predictions on the sample image can be visualized in order to understand which parts of the image  the model focuses on. This research will also be valuable for building dependable and accessible methods of automation for the diagnosis of skin lesions that might be useful for doctors in the early detection and improve the treatment of the patient.
